JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Gwen Ifill is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: The
U.S. Supreme
Court will take up a challenge
to President
Obama's immigration orders,
which shield more
than four million immigrants
from deportation.
Then, we will get a
behind-the-scenes look
at the Iran prisoner swap from
Brett McGurk,
the lead American negotiator.
And the first in our series on
Understanding
Autism, a history of how it was
discovered,
and why it may be more prevalent
today.
STEVE SILBERMAN, Author,
"NeuroTribes": I
spoke to older parents who had
been told by
their psychiatrists to quietly
remove the
pictures of their children from
the family
album and never speak of them
again.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. Supreme
Court has
set the stage for a major
election-year decision
on immigration policy. The
justices announced
today they will consider whether
President
Obama overstepped his authority
when he allowed
millions of people to avoid
deportation. We
will explore this in full right
after the
news summary.
There's word that three
Americans who disappeared
in Baghdad last week were
kidnapped by a Shiite
militia. Reuters reported that
today, citing
Iraqi and U.S. sources. It said
the group
is backed by Iran, but that U.S.
officials
don't think Iran's government
was involved
in the abduction.
Iraqi civilians are being killed
at a -- quote
-- "staggering rate" since the
rise of the
Islamic State group. A U.N.
report now says
that at least 18,800 Iraqis died
from violence
between the start of 2014 and
last October.
And, in Geneva, the U.N. human
rights office
said today the toll is even
higher when you
count other factors.
RAVINA SHAMSADANI, Spokeswoman,
United Nations
High Commissioner for Human
Rights: It doesn't
include those people who have
died as a result
of malnutrition, as a result of
lack of access
to medical care, and as a result
of lack of
access to the basic facilities
that they need
for the vulnerable population,
for people
with disabilities, for the
elderly. So, this
is really the tip of the
iceberg.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.N. agency
also said that
Islamic State militants are
holding some 3,500
Iraqis as slaves, many of them
women and children.
In economic news, China
announced today that
its economy met fourth-quarter
projections,
but, for the year, it grew at
the lowest rate
since 1990, 6.9 percent. In
turn, the International
Monetary Fund announced in
London that it's
revising its global forecast
down again.
MAURICE OBSTFELD, International
Monetary Fund:
Turbulence in financial markets
has returned
amid renewed concern about risks
to global
economic growth. China's slower
growth and
rising financial market risks,
the fall in
commodity prices, notably the
price of oil,
and asynchronous trends in
monetary policy
mainly between the U.S. and most
other advanced
economies.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will take a
closer look
at the Chinese economy later in
the program.
New estimates have growth in the
U.S. slowing,
too, as federal deficits start
rising again.
The Congressional Budget Office
said today
that it expects this year's
deficit will top
$540 billion, $100 billion more
than last
year. The main cause is
Congress' recent decision
to make a number of tax cuts
permanent and
to increase spending. At the
same time, the
economy will grow 2.7 percent,
down from an
earlier estimate.
In the presidential race,
Republican Donald
Trump has won the backing of
former Alaska
Governor Sarah Palin. She was
the party's
vice presidential nominee in
2008, and has
since become a major voice in
the Tea Party
movement.
And Wall Street struggled today.
The Dow Jones
industrial average rose 28
points to close
at 16016. The Nasdaq was down 11
points, and
the S&P 500 added just one
point.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the Supreme
Court to review President
Obama's actions
to block deportations; the lead
U.S. negotiator
on the Iranian prisoner swap;
dark clouds
on the horizon for the global
economy; and
much more.
on the horizon for the global
economy; and
much more.
It's official: The Supreme Court
will hear
a case this term that could
decide the fate
of one of President Obama's
major immigration
moves. It would defer
deportation for more
than four million undocumented
immigrants
and permit them to work legally
in the U.S.
Lower courts have sided with the
26 states
that sued the federal government
over the
program, and those courts have
put the program
on ice for now.
But the White House said today
the administration
is confident the high court will
rule in its
favor.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
The kinds of executive actions
that the president
took a little over a year ago
now to try to
bring some much-needed reforms
and greater
accountability to our broken
immigration system
were clearly consistent with the
precedent
that was established by other
presidents,
and clearly within the confines
of his authority
as president of the United
States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But that is the
issue that
26 states dispute. Texas is one
of those states,
and its attorney general, Ken
Paxton, said
today in a statement -- quote --
"There are
limits to the president's
authority, and those
limits enacted by Congress were
exceeded when
the president unilaterally
sought to grant
lawful presence to more than
four million
unauthorized aliens who are in
this country
unlawfully."
For more on the case, we turn to
our regular,
Marcia Coyle of "The National
Law Journal."
And, Marcia, welcome.
MARCIA COYLE, "The National Law
Journal":
Judy, thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, some
background first.
This order the president made
has been challenged
almost from the very beginning,
hasn't it?
MARCIA COYLE: It was.
The executive action came in
November of 2014.
Less than a month later, 26
Republican-led
states challenged it in federal
district court.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what was the
basis?
MARCIA COYLE: The states are
making a number
of claims here. One, they claim
that the action
violates the take care clause of
the federal
Constitution. That's in Article
2, Section
3 of the Constitution. And it
says the president
must enforce -- I'm sorry --
must faithfully
enforce the laws.
They also claim that his action
is arbitrary
and capricious, his action
violates the notice
and public comment requirement
of the Administrative
Procedure Act. That's a law that
governs how
agencies go about making rules
and regulations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we know the
justices
don't ever, I guess, give a
reason for taking
up a case, but why is it thought
that they're
doing this?
MARCIA COYLE: Well, I think it
was understood
that they probably would take
this case. You
have a federal court, a federal
appellate
court blocking a major federal
government
program.
The top lawyer for the
administration in the
Supreme Court, the solicitor
general of the
United States, went to the
Supreme Court after
the injunction was issued and
said, please
take this case and resolve these
legal questions.
And I think it was a given that
the court
would step into it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you mentioned
that this
is -- they're looking at the
take care clause,
which I read today hasn't -- is
something
the court hasn't done in 70
years. So, this
has historic consequences,
presumably.
MARCIA COYLE: It has potentially
major consequences.
The take care clause really will
go to the
relationship between the
executive branch
and Congress. So, what the court
says, if
it deals with it, and it doesn't
have to -- even
though it has asked the parties
to address
it, it could rule narrowly or
address the
take care clause.
But whatever the court says
could affect all
kinds of executive actions that
the White
House would take beyond
immigration. So, that's
a potentially very broad
question. Also, there's
a very important threshold
issue, and that
is whether Texas even had the
right to sue
the United States.
The Obama administration claims
it didn't
have the kind of concrete injury
this -- that
is required for standing to sue.
This action,
the government says, doesn't
require Texas
to do anything or not do
anything. However,
the lower court said Texas would
have the
cost of issuing driver's
license, which is
under Texas law, and that was
the injury to
Texas.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Marcia, it's also
clear from
the reading of this that the
court added the
threshold of constitutionality
to what they're
looking at. What's the
significance of that?
MARCIA COYLE: The take care
clause question
was in the lawsuit to begin
with. Texas had
raised that.
It may be that the justices want
to get all
of the issues out on the table
when they sit
down to finally make a decision.
It may be
that certain justices were
interested in the
take care clause issue. Or it
may be that
certain justices had read a
"Harvard Law Journal"
article by a former clerk and
current presidential
candidate, guess who, who wrote
all about
the take care clause and talked
in that article
about the egregious overreaching
by the Obama
administration on immigration
and other issues.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you were
telling me this
is Senator Ted Cruz...
MARCIA COYLE: That's correct.
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... who has, of
course, a legal
background.
MARCIA COYLE: I do think it's
the least -- that's
the least likely reason they
took the case,
but since this is becoming a
very political
kind of case, he did write about
it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And presumably
not a coincidence.
But on the timing of it, it is
an election
year.
MARCIA COYLE: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about the
timetable for
the court deciding?
MARCIA COYLE: The court will
probably hear
the arguments in April, and
there would probably
be a decision by the end of
June. That's the
regular schedule at the court.
If there is a decision in June,
as you well
know and we all know, that's in
the middle
of the election cycle, and
immigration is
already a huge, contentious
issue. The court
itself now becomes a player in
that very contentious
debate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Marcia Coyle, we
thank you.
MARCIA COYLE: My pleasure, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now, for two
opposing perspectives
on this case, Marielena is the
executive director
of the National Immigration Law
Center. And
Josh Blackman is associate
professor of law
at the South Texas College of
Law. Both of
them have followed this case
closely as it
moved up through the federal
courts.
And we welcome both of you back
to the program.
Marielena Hincapie, let me start
with you.
Is this something you welcome or
you worry
about, that the court is finally
taking this
up?
MARIELENA HINCAPIE, Executive
Director, National
Immigration Law Center: Thanks,
Judy.
We definitely welcome this
decision. We're
very delighted that the court
decided to hear
this case, because it has the
potential life-changing
impact on over four million
parents of U.S.
citizen children. And, most
importantly, it
really has the ability to bring
much-needed
stability to five million U.S.
citizen children
whose parents would benefit from
these programs.
So, definitely, this is a
welcome day.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Josh Blackman,
posing the same
question to you, is this
something you look
forward to or are you concerned?
JOSH BLACKMAN, Constitutional
Law Professor,
South Texas College of Law:
Well, the separation
of power dispute between the
president and
Congress is fairly rare.
But I think it's quite
significant, as my
good friend Marcia mentioned a
moment ago,
that the court chose to address
the take care
clause issue. She mentioned this
hasn't been
reversed in 70 years. I actually
went back
to look at the briefs for this
-- the seizure
case, the Youngstown case from
1954. It barely
mentioned the take care clause
there either.
So, by my cursory research, this
may be first
time the court has ever asked
for briefings
on the take care clause. And to
make the point
a little bit more clearly, they
didn't add
this case -- this question just
to tie up
loose ends. Even if the court
rules in favor
of the Obama administration on
administrative
grounds, that still leaves the
constitutional
issue lingering.
So they really need to resolve
this question
once and for all, so that Texas
doesn't just
sue right back in the same court
once the
president goes through the
proper administrative
channels.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Marielena
Hincapie, is -- how
strong is the argument from the
administration
that the president was acting
within the constitutional
-- his constitutional role when
he issued
this order saying that these
four million-plus
immigrants may not be deported?
MARIELENA HINCAPIE: Yes, Judy,
the legal precedent
is pretty well-established, and
the majority
of legal scholars agree with the
administration,
as do we at the National
Immigration Law Center.
And, as Marcia mentioned,
there's historical
precedent as well. Both
Republican and Democratic
administrations, every single
administration
since President Eisenhower, has
exercised
very similar executive actions.
So, I think the administration
knew what it
was doing. It took its time. And
it acted
both on historical and strong
solid legal
ground.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In that case,
Josh Blackman,
then what is it that the states
-- what is
the strongest argument that
these 26 states
have in saying the president
overstepped his
bounds?
JOSH BLACKMAN: Well, with
respect to my good
friend Marielena, we have done
this a few
times before, I don't think the
precedents
going back to Eisenhower are
that clear.
To give you an example, deferred
action has
often been used as a bring to
get a person
from one status to another. So,
for example,
if you were a student at Tulane
University
in New Orleans, Hurricane
Katrina hits, you're
a foreign student, you just lost
your status.
President Bush used deferred
action to bridge
you from when you had a status
and you lost
it, and said, if you get another
degree and
you enroll at another university
in a few
months, you can keep your
status.
Deferred action has been used on
a case-by-case
basis. What's frankly
unprecedented about
the president's action is the
size and scale
that has been done. On a scale
of five million
people, you have a standard
that's very, very
vague that basically everyone
who applies
will be granted for it.
There is no precedent to justify
this scope
of executive power and granting
deferred access
to so many aliens.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Marielena
Hincapie, you're
shaking your head.
MARIELENA HINCAPIE: Yes,
absolutely not.
I mean, Josh -- Josh knows this.
Deferred
action is adjudicated on a
case-by-case basis.
There is nothing that the
administration is
saying that there is absolutely
categorical
eligibility and approval for.
Individuals
will have to come forward
voluntarily. A parent
of a U.S. citizen will need to
make that risk
and benefit -- cost-benefit
analysis of coming
forward to the federal
government, paying
a fine, going through a national
security
and criminal background check,
and then providing
the evidence that they meet the
criteria.
An individual agent from the
U.S. Citizenship
and -- Citizenship and
Immigration Services
will determine whether that
individual is
eligible or not or deny them.
So, this isn't
-- this is exactly what the
president did
in 2012 with the deferred action
for childhood
arrivals, for example.
Interestingly, Texas
and 25 states didn't sue the
president over
DACA.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about that,
Josh Blackman?
JOSH BLACKMAN: So, the grant
rate for the
2012 program was over 97
percent.
The government has not been able
to find a
single instance where a person
was denied
for discretionary reasons, not
one (INAUDIBLE)
two years. They could not find a
single instance
where a person was denied DACA,
the 2012 program,
for discretionary reasons.
If the government wants to hedge
its case
on how discretionary DACA was, I
think they're
going to lose. The broader issue
is that this
is not really a case about Texas
vs. the United
States. As Marcia mentioned,
this is a case
about Congress vs. the United
States. The
president has decided he didn't
like the law
Congress gave him. Congress
didn't vote for
the law he wanted, so he decided
to achieve
as much as possible that he
could.
And one point I would like to
stress is, even
if this decision is rendered in
July of 2016,
President Obama cannot possibly
execute this
on his watch. This will fall to
the next president
to actually implement. So, in
many respects,
it doesn't matter what the court
does here,
right?
If the court rules for Texas,
then the issue
is over. If the court rules for
the president,
then the next presidential
election will continue
it, because a Republican
president will not
continue this policy, and a
Democratic president
will, and maybe achieve
legislative reform.
So, no matter what happens in
July, this will
be a matter for the American
people to vote
on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Marielena
Hincapie, do you
agree that either way it's
something that
is going to be up to the public?
MARIELENA HINCAPIE: Definitely.
I think I disagree with Josh in
terms of the
implementation of it. The
administration was
ready to start implementing the
expansion
of DACA the day after Judge
Hanen issued his
decision and it was blocked, so
they will
be able to start implementing
that very quickly.
And then with DACA, it will
probably take,
I don't know, weeks, maybe a
couple of months.
But I do think that this is
going to be part
of the thinking of U.S. citizens
who have
immigrant family members. U.S.
citizens will
go to the ballot and they will
vote for their
family's interest. They will
vote for a president
that will continue President
Obama's executive
actions, especially if they are
given the
green light by the Supreme
Court.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Watching it
closely. We thank
both of you, Josh Blackman,
Marielena Hincapie.
Thank you.
MARIELENA HINCAPIE: Thank you,
Judy.
JOSH BLACKMAN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For the past 14
months, a small
team of Americans from the State
Department
and other agencies met in secret
with Iranian
negotiators. And the two sides
eventually
worked out a deal to release
prisoners Iran
was holding and grant a pardon
to individuals
charged in the U.S.
Today, we heard for the first
time from one
of five Americans released.
Former U.S. Marine Amir Hekmati
emerged today
in Landstuhl, Germany, and said
he feels born
again.
AMIR HEKMATI, Freed Prisoner: I
was at the
point where I had just sort of
accepted the
fact that I was going to be
spending 10 years
in prison. So, this was a
surprise, and I
just feel extremely blessed to
see my government
do so much for me and the other
Americans.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hekmati is being
evaluated
at a U.S. military hospital,
along with a
Christian minister, Saeed
Abedini, and Washington
Post reporter Jason Rezaian, who
was seen
for the first time today with
his wife in
video from The Post.
It was reported their release
was delayed
Sunday, when Iranian officials
blocked Rezaian's
wife and mother from boarding a
plane in Tehran.
The New York Times said
Secretary of State
John Kerry had to make a phone
call to put
the exchange back on course.
AMIR HEKMATI: As soon as we got
out of Iranian
airspace, the champagne bottles
were popped.
And the Swiss are amazing, their
hospitality,
chocolates. Veal was served.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to be
resolved, the fate
of American Robert
Levinson, who disappeared from a
resort in
Iran nearly nine years ago.
Meanwhile, Iranians, too, are
celebrating,
as international economic
sanctions end under
the terms of the nuclear deal.
But Iran's
supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali
Khamenei, made
clear today he remains
suspicious of U.S.
intentions.
In a letter to President Hassan
Rouhani, he
said: "I reiterate the need to
be vigilant
about the deceit and treachery
of arrogant
countries, especially the United
States, in
this nuclear issue and other
issues."
At the same time, White House
Press Secretary
Josh Earnest pointed to the
nuclear deal and
the prisoner release as examples
of principled
diplomacy. It's now clear that
the prisoner
swap negotiations proceeded on a
secret and
separate track from the nuclear
talks.
The effort was led by Brett
McGurk, special
presidential envoy on fighting
the Islamic
State group since 2015.
I sat down with McGurk earlier
today, and
began by asking him what it was
like to be
the first to see the released
Iranian-Americans
on the plane when they landed in
Geneva.
BRETT MCGURK, Special
Presidential Envoy for
the Global Coalition to Counter
ISIL: It was
just overwhelming. That's really
the only
word that I can use.
We have been working on this in
secret for
14 months, and I have been in
regular contact
with the families. It was an
incredibly difficult
process. Until the last moment
that the plane
took off from Tehran and
actually left Iranian
airspace, you never really knew.
The night before, we had an
episode in which
Jason Rezaian's mother and his
wife could
not be located. We finally
located Mary Rezaian,
Jason's mother, at about 4:00
a.m. Geneva
time, very early morning in
Tehran time. I
spoke with her on the phone and
told her to
stay where she was. We worked
with the Swiss
to pick her up.
But until they were on the plane
and actually
left Iranian airspace, nothing
was really
certain. So, in Geneva, when
they landed,
I -- they were greeted by the
Swiss state
secretary, because Switzerland,
the Swiss
government was critical for this
entire thing.
But I got on the plane and
welcomed them out
of Iran, told them that your
country, the
United States, is going to do
everything we
possibly can for you and can't
wait to get
you hope.
And it was just an incredibly
emotional moment.
I honestly will never forget it.
And to see
them all together, it's hard to
even put it
into words.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How difficult was
this process?
I mean, some people have looked
at this and
said, well, the Iranians really
were planning
to release them all along, but
they just weren't
going to say so.
BRETT MCGURK: Well, not quite.
Hekmati was sentenced to death
in 2011. And
Amir Hekmati's sentence was
later reduced,
but he was going to be in prison
through about
2022. Saeed Abedini was
sentenced in 2012
and he was serving a prison term
until 2021.
Jason Rezaian had not been
sentenced yet,
but he had been imprisoned for
18 months,
and the sentence that he was
facing -- his
trial had already been over --
was going to
be in a period of decades at
least.
And so I completely disagree.
It's contrary
to all the information that we
have. And I
think, had we not been able to
find a way
forward here, I think these
Americans were
looking at a very substantial,
many, many
years in Evin prison.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why do you think
you were successful?
What were the forces inside Iran
that made
this work, working with you?
BRETT MCGURK: This process came
out of the
nuclear negotiation, but in the
nuclear negotiations,
primarily, the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs
and some other elements of the
Iranian system
that don't have the
decision-making authority
over the security apparatus and
the people
that actually hold the keys to
the prison
cells.
So we had to open up a parallel
track and
begin negotiations with those
elements of
the Iranian system, who we have
really not
had any engagement with. And so
one reason
it took a long time is that this
was the first
substantial engagement we really
ever had
with that element of the system.
I think my Iranian counterpart,
it's safe
to say I may have been first
American they
have really ever met. And for
many months,
it was just a lot of back and
forth about
historical narratives and
competing visions
of what has actually happened
between our
two countries. And, of course,
we didn't give
any ground about their history
of hostage-taking
and support for terrorism, and
they would
go through their narrative.
Eventually, I said, look, we
could do this
for months, or we can decide
whether there
is a way to actually get
something done. We
wanted our American citizens
home, period.
That's why we were there. And if
there was
no way to talk about
practicalities of how
to do that, there was no reason
to have a
discussion.
And, eventually, really after
the nuclear
agreement came to fruition,
things started
to accelerate a little bit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Who were these
people you were
dealing with, and are they the
people who
the U.S. can do business with in
the future
and get productive things done
with in the
future?
BRETT MCGURK: I mean, we will
have to see.
This was so tough. And even in
the last 72
hours, it was literally some
real shouting
matches. And we did this all
bilaterally,
but the Swiss were always there,
and sometimes
we would bring the Swiss in to
mediate, because
it's just incredibly difficult.
We have agreed to have a
process, a channel,
a consular channel to continue
discussions,
should that be necessary. The
case of Robert
Levinson, of course, was the
topic of conversation
every single round. As we said
in 2011, we
have to reason to believe he's
not being held
in Iran, so it's a different
case.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There is another
American -- Iranian-American
still being held, Mr. Namazi.
How cruel is
it to leave them behind and let
these others
-- other five out?
BRETT MCGURK: Any other cases, I
can't really
discuss in detail, for privacy
reasons and
things, but I would just say
we're going to
continue to work, work this
every day.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In terms of what
happened,
there are critics in this
country who are
saying this swap should never
have happened,
that these people were -- should
never have
been held in the first place and
the U.S.
shouldn't have done anything in
return to
win their release.
BRETT MCGURK: I think the
reality is, if you
take that position, then Jason
Rezaian should
have stayed in Evin prison for
decades. Amir
Hekmati would have been in
prison through
2022, and Saeed Abedini until
about the same
time.
So that was the reality that you
face. There
was no way to simply say, they
have to be
released, release them. Of
course, they're
wrongfully detained, and we have
made that
clear consistently, particularly
with the
Iranians. These were totally
unjust detentions,
imprisonments.
However, to get them out, you
can't get them
out by just saying, hey, get
them out. And
so we had to figure out a
formula. And I think
if you really look at it, in
terms of, on
the Iranian side, you're looking
at nonviolent
individuals, all -- some of them
quite elderly,
people who in some cases their
sentences were
about the run in less than a
year anyway.
Most of them would have been out
of prison
before even the first of the
Americans were
to be out of prison. Given the
category of
cases we're talking about, of
sanctions violations,
three of them had been
convicted, three of
them were pending trial, and one
was about
to plead his case. So, only
three were actually
in prison.
I think if you look at that and
you consider
what the stakes were if we could
not find
a way forward here for these
Americans in
Evin prison, at the end of the
day, I think
the president made the right
call here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You said that
there is no way
to know whether this deal, these
deals will
lead to something productive in
the future
between the U.S. and Iran. But,
specifically,
do you see something, some
movement on their
part when it comes to Syria?
BRETT MCGURK: We have this
Vienna process
in which the Iranians are at the
table and
the Saudis are at the table for
the first
time since the Iranian -- Syrian
civil war
broke out about five years ago.
And that's encouraging, but
that's a very
difficult process. I think,
look, Iran is
a country that's going --
undergoing some
fundamental questions about its
future. It
has elections coming up here in
about a month.
For the first time in the
history since the
Iranian Revolution, they have
parliamentary
elections the same day as
they're electing
their assembly of experts, which
will select
the next supreme leader.
So, you will have a very high
turnout. And,
already, you can see what's
happening with
the supreme leader trying to ban
a number
of reformist candidates. So,
within Iran,
there is this big competition
for the reins
of power. And how that plays out
I think will
say a lot about what's possible.
But that's something the
Iranians have to
figure out. The United States
will continue
to protect our interests in the
region. We
define our interest based upon
our own national
security interests. And when it
comes to Americans
sitting in Evin prison, I think
that's something
that we have taken with the
utmost seriousness.
And, obviously, other than the
families, we
didn't tell anybody about this
channel, because,
had it not been secret, it would
have been
impossible to make any progress.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Special
Presidential Envoy
Brett McGurk, thank you very
much.
BRETT MCGURK: Judy, thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
rethinking autism,
what's really behind the
seemingly sudden
rise in diagnoses; and very
early learning,
health care and education that
starts before
birth and continues after.
But, first, worries over global
economic growth,
falling markets, and China's
connection to
what's happening.
Jeffrey Brown zeros in on the
China piece
of the story.
JEFFREY BROWN: Six-point-nine
percent annual
growth, it doesn't sound so bad,
but context
and direction are everything.
And China's
latest quarterly GDP numbers
were lower than
expected, and the year showed
the slowest
pace of growth there in 25
years, all of course
with huge implications for the
rest of the
world, the U.S. very much
included.
We get perspective from two who
watch this
closely, Ken Lieberthal, a
political scientist
with the Brookings Institution,
and Cornell
University economist Eswar
Prasad.
Welcome back to both of you.
Ken Lieberthal, let me start
with you.
How much of a slowdown, downturn
is it? How
do you characterize China's
economy today?
KENNETH LIEBERTHAL, Brookings
Institution:
Well, it's a significant
slowdown, but let's
keep in mind they wanted the GDP
rate to slow
down.
JEFFREY BROWN: They wanted it?
KENNETH LIEBERTHAL: They wanted
it. The question
is, can they use this slowdown
to transition
to a different economic model?
And they're having a rocky time
doing that.
That is in progress, but it's a
tough balancing
act, and I think it's not going
quite as smoothly
as they had hoped.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, we
will get to the
larger model change.
But, Eswar Prasad, first, this
big question:
How much of a slowdown? What do
you see?
ESWAR PRASAD, Professor of Trade
Policy, Cornell
University: China's economy has
been powered
by the manufacturing sector.
There has been
a lot of investment in the
economy, not all
of it very good investment.
China has to some extent relied
on exports.
And they're trying to shift
towards a model
of growth that is largely driven
by the services
sector, which is much better at
generating
employment. They'd like more
consumption in
the economy, with private
consumption taking
the lead.
And they're making very gradual
progress.
Right now, it turns out that in
2015 private
consumption did contribute a
little more than
half of GDP growth. The services
sector now
accounts for more than half of
GDP.
So, this is a big ocean liner.
It's very difficult
to turn around, but they're very
gradually
turning it around in the right
direction.
The problem is that slowing
growth makes it
harder to put in place the
reforms to get
the ship staying on the right
road.
JEFFREY BROWN: The numbers
themselves, though,
first, how accurate are they,
right? Do we
believe the numbers that come
from China on
their GDP?
KENNETH LIEBERTHAL: It's very
hard to tell.
Keep in mind that their
statistical system
was really quite good at
capturing the -- what's
now the old economy, the
industrial economy,
the export economy that Eswar
was just talking
about. That economy is not doing
well. They're
now trying to grow, as he
mentioned, the service
economy and consumption economy.
The statistics are not collected
as effectively
on that part of the economy. So
there's a
fudge factor here that, frankly,
makes it
hard to be very precise.
JEFFREY BROWN: So this is the
model that you're
both talking about, this change,
right, from
a manufacturing to a more
consumer-oriented,
a service economy.
KENNETH LIEBERTHAL: And also
more of an innovative
economy, where they end up not
being the assemblers
of high-tech things produced
elsewhere, where
they bolt them together in China
for export
or domestic consumption.
They want to become an
innovative, higher
value-added kind of economy. And
that's a
difficult transition.
JEFFREY BROWN: And would you
agree that part
of that is inevitable, as the
economy becomes
-- well, as Ken was saying, that
they want
to, in part -- some of this has
to happen,
right?
ESWAR PRASAD: It has to.
And if it doesn't, there is
going to be a
huge cost on China, because the
model that
has been in place so far,
investment-driven,
industrial-led growth, it's led
to a lot of
very inefficient investment, and
China is
living with the consequences to
this day.
There are lots of loans taken by
state-owned
enterprises that are not going
to be paid
back, and somebody is going to
have to pay
the bill.
Although this isn't likely to
lead to a financial
crisis, it's still a big bill
for Chinese
citizens. Plus, the
environmental consequences
of this industrial-led growth
have not been
great, and it's not been that
great at generating
employment.
So, in terms of GDP growth, it's
been a great
model, but in terms of the
environmental,
human consequences and
consequences in terms
of the benefits for the average
Chinese citizen,
not so great.
JEFFREY BROWN: Part of those
human consequences,
of course, an aging population
as well, right,
a work force?
KENNETH LIEBERTHAL: Yes. That's
a result in
part of their one-child policy.
And they're
really now paying the price for
that, because
they have had a large number of
people entering
the work force for years, and a
large number
of working age.
Now the number of people of
working age in
China is actually beginning to
decline every
year, and it isn't being made up
by kids too
young to work. Rather, they have
an explosion
in the number of people who are
now retiring
and, you know, getting much
older, and therefore
have a lot more demands for
health care and
all kinds of other things that
are going to
tax their system.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, to the extent
that you
are both saying this is about
managing this
change -- Eswar, you can start
with this -- where
do you see the country, the
government doing
well? Where do you see it doing
poorly?
ESWAR PRASAD: Over the last
year, there have
been some reforms put in place,
but largely
in terms of the financial
system. They started
getting some changes instituted
in the banking
system.
They're trying to make the
currency float
more freely. But the real side
reform, the
reforms to liberalize the
services sector
so it can grow faster, generate
more employment,
take on the burden of growth,
the reform of
the state-owned enterprises, all
of those
are real side, supply-side
reform, including
the reforms to increase
innovation, as Ken
mentioned, those are not going
so fast.
And if those reforms don't
supplement the
financial sector reforms, this
economy is
not going to go in the right
direction.
JEFFREY BROWN: What would you
add to that?
And bring in -- and, of course,
we're talking
about the -- inevitably about
the political
system's impact on the economy,
right?
KENNETH LIEBERTHAL: Yes.
And in China, local levels of
the political
system, you know, province --
most provinces
are as big as countries are in
Europe, for
example -- province on down,
really have a
huge role to play in this
system. They have
been generators of the kind of
GDP growth
that we have seen over the
years.
The way this is being approached
now has the
heads of these local political
systems running
very scared, unclear what will
be rewarded
and what will be punished,
afraid of being
tagged with corruption, not
getting the kinds
of rewards they used to get.
And so the way they're pursuing
this is in
some ways making it very
difficult to implement
some of these headline programs
that you see
announced at the top. It's a
kind of hidden
story that, in fact, I think
it's having -- is
slowing down the real economy
reforms quite
a bit.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, Eswar, we
just have about
30 seconds.
But we have been talking on this
program,
of course, and everywhere,
talking about the
impact of all this on the rest
of the word,
right, markets and all kinds of
things. That
will continue.
ESWAR PRASAD: There's a lot of
bad news coming
out of China. The stock market
hasn't been
doing well, the currency is
plunging, but
all of this doesn't mean that
the real economy
is really collapsing or even
stalling.
I think there is decent momentum
in the underlying
economy. And what we should all
be looking
for is not how fast China grows,
but how it
grows. And I think it's slowly
moving in the
right direction, but there's a
lot of work
to be done still.
JEFFREY BROWN: A lot of changes
to come that
will impact us.
ESWAR PRASAD: Indeed.
JEFFREY BROWN: Eswar Prasad, Ken
Lieberthal,
thank you both very much.
KENNETH LIEBERTHAL: Thank you.
ESWAR PRASAD: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now the first of
two looks
we're taking at the history of
autism.
There seems to be more and more
instances
of it, but in this edition of
the "NewsHour"
Bookshelf, science writer Steve
Silberman
argues that the rise of autism
is not some
mysterious byproduct of the
modern world,
but instead a result of our
growing understanding
of the full range of the
disorder.
William Brangham spoke with him
recently in
New York.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The most
recent federal
data shows one in every 68
American children
is diagnosed with autism.
Fifteen years ago,
it was one in every 150
children.
In his book "NeuroTribes," Steve
Silberman
explores the history behind that
dramatic
increase. "NeuroTribes" has been
lauded as
one of the best scientific books
of the past
year. It won the 2015 Samuel
Johnson Prize
for Non-Fiction and made the
best-of lists
for over half-a-dozen newspapers
and magazines.
Silberman says the genesis of
the book came
more than 15 years ago, after he
wrote this
story for "Wired" magazine about
autistic
kids in Silicon Valley. After it
ran, Silberman
was swamped with e-mails from
others who were
struggling with the disease.
STEVE SILBERMAN, Author,
"NeuroTribes": People
were wrestling with very
profound day-to-day
problems with finding health
care, finding
employment, finding schools for
their kids.
Meanwhile, the entire world was
having a conversation
about autism, but it was a
completely different
conversation. It was about
whether or not
vaccines caused autism. And that
dominated
virtually every mention of
autism in the media.
Certainly, if there was an
article about autism
that didn't mention vaccines,
the comment
thread on the Internet would be
about vaccines.
And so I started to think that
there was a
disjunction between the problems
that autistic
people and their families were
dealing with
every day of their lives and
what the whole
world was talking about.
I learned that what happened has
less to do
with the slow and cautious
progress of science
than it does with the seductive
power of storytelling.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Silberman's
deep dive into
the world of autism took him
back to the very
first researchers who tried to
define and
diagnose the condition.
STEVE SILBERMAN: The true
discover of autism
was a guy named Hans Asperger in
Vienna in
the mid-1930s, and he and his
colleagues discovered
what we would now call the
autism spectrum.
It was a very, very broad
condition with many
different manifestations ranging
from kids
who couldn't talk at all and
would need help
every day of their lives to one
of his former
patients became an astronomy
professor, actually,
but he was still autistic.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And Asperger
saw those people
at this end and at that end, and
said they
all share something similar.
STEVE SILBERMAN: They all share
a very distinctive
constellation of traits. And he
had no illusions
about that he would cure them.
He just wanted for them to take
on the challenge
of living in a world that wasn't
built for
them.
So, one of the things about Hans
Asperger
was that he believed that autism
was very,
very common, that once you
recognize the distinctive
traits of autism, you would see
them everywhere.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Asperger and
his colleagues
documented the range of patients
they classified
as having autism, but as Adolf
Hitler came
to power and invaded Austria,
the work ceased
and several of Asperger's
colleagues fled
to the United States.
STEVE SILBERMAN: They had to
leave. Otherwise,
they would have been sent to a
concentration
camp.
They were rescued by a guy named
Leo Kanner
in Baltimore. Leo Kanner was one
of the first
child psychiatrists in America.
Kanner framed
autism very, very differently
than Asperger
had done. Whereas Asperger saw
that it was
common and a lifelong condition,
Leo Kanner
saw it as a very, very rare form
of childhood
psychosis.
He was quoted in "TIME" magazine
as saying
that parents caused autism by
being too caught
up in their own careers and too
unloving.
And he called them refrigerator
parents, basically.
And by blaming parents, that
opened the door
for psychologists to come in and
say, well,
actually, we know what to do
with these children.
And the recommended course of
treatment for
autism for most of the 20th
century was
institutionalization.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Take the kids
away from
their families?
STEVE SILBERMAN: Exactly,
because the families
were considered toxic, in a
sense. And so
they were put in mental
institutions, psych
wards, state schools, where they
were subjected
to very, very brutal treatments.
You know, kids were subjected to
shock treatments,
lobotomies, kept in
straitjackets. They were
also put in wards with people
who were not
like them. They were often put
in wards with
adult psychotics. Those children
didn't thrive.
Leo Kanner eventually had to
admit that -- A,
that parents didn't cause
autism, which created
a terrible nightmare for
families for decades.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Sure. I mean,
imagine being
a parent who is obviously, one,
struggling
with the difficulty of having a
child struggling
with this condition...
STEVE SILBERMAN: Yes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: ... and then
let alone having
the world think that you were to
blame because
you were cold-hearted.
STEVE SILBERMAN: Exactly.
And I spoke to older parents who
had been
told by their psychiatrists to
quietly remove
the pictures of their children
from the family
album and never speak of them
again.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Silberman
reports that it
wasn't until the early 1980s
that Asperger's
contributions were rediscovered.
That's when a British
psychiatrist named Lorna
Wing, herself the mother of an
autistic child,
began taking a census of
autistic kids in
a particular suburb of London.
STEVE SILBERMAN: She and a
research assistant
named Judith Gould went to
special schools.
They went to clinics. They were
digging through
medical records.
And what they found was, yes, a
bunch of autistic
kids who met Kanner's strict
criteria, but
they found a bunch of other kids
who clearly
had autistic traits, but didn't
quite meet
Kanner's criteria for diagnosis.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The strict
criteria.
STEVE SILBERMAN: The strict
So, she was like, who are these
kids? Like,
why has no one noticed these
children before?
She didn't know what to make of
her data,
until she came across a
reference to Hans
Asperger's 1944 paper. She read
it. She said,
yes, this is it. This is exactly
what I'm
seeing.
And so she worked behind the
scenes for several
years with the people who were
developing
the definition of autism in the
Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders,
the bible of psychiatry, to
broaden the criteria
for diagnosis to include what we
would now
call the autism spectrum.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Silberman
argues it was
this broadened definition of
autism, that
coupled with better diagnostic
tools and better
public education, that explains
the dramatic
rise in the number of diagnosed
cases, not
the repeatedly debunked theory
that vaccines
cause autism.
In your book, you argue that we
should think
of autism as a disability, but
don't we already
think of it in that way?
STEVE SILBERMAN: I think we tend
to think
of autism as not only a disease,
but as a
historical aberration.
So, if it's not vaccines, it's
Wi-Fi or it's
pesticides or it's
antidepressants in the
water supply. It's some factor
in the toxic
modern world. But once we
realize that autism
and autistic people have always
been part
of the human community, that
there were always
autistic people there, but they
were hidden
away, either behind the walls of
institutions
or behind other diagnostic
labels, not getting
the help that they need, we
understand that
autism is a very, very common
disability,
as Hans Asperger believed.
It's not some rare form of
childhood psychosis
caused by parenting, as Leo
Kanner believed.
Because we have thought of it as
the toxic
byproduct of our modern world,
we haven't
thought about making
accommodations for, for
instance, the many autistic
adults that are
out there.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: OK. Steve
Silberman, thank
you very much.
STEVE SILBERMAN: Thank you. It's
great to
be here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will
continue our Understanding
Autism series tomorrow with a
conversation
with two reporters about the
challenges facing
adults with autism.
Next: a look at a political
rarity: an expanding
health program supported by both
Democrats
and Republicans.
Special correspondent Cat Wise
reports.
KIMBERLY HIRST, Registered
Nurse: I have a
book for you guys today.
CAT WISE: In Aurora, Colorado,
registered
nurse Kimberly Hirst (ph) is
checking in on
19-year-old Sinai Herrera (ph)
and her 2-year-old
son, Caleb (ph).
KIMBERLY HIRST: One, two, buckle
my shoe.
CAT WISE: The visits are part of
a rapidly
expanding program called the
Nurse Family
Partnership. The partnership
combines old-fashioned
social services with the latest
brain science,
all to help low-income
first-time mothers
and their children.
KIMBERLY HIRST: Time and time
again, I see
these young girls drop out of
school, so they're
at risk for that and living in
poverty forever.
CAT WISE: The regular visits
begin in pregnancy
and continue until the children
are 2 years
old. Nurses offer advice on
health, parenting,
and self-sufficiency.
KIMBERLY HIRST: It's really so
much more educational,
rather than clinical. And so I
feel like sometimes
I'm, like, a life coach.
CAT WISE: Improved outcomes,
like a 48 percent
reduction in child abuse and an
82 percent
increased employment for
mothers, have been
so significant that Congress
recently voted
to infuse home-visit programs
with $800 million
in new funding.
But while the Nurse Family
Partnership is
focused on health and poverty,
another outcome
is catching the attention of
early learning
experts. Kids from the program
are showing
up at school better prepared.
David Olds, the project's
founder and a professor
of pediatrics at the University
of Colorado's
School of Medicine, says the
educational benefits
are no surprise.
DAVID OLDS, University of
Colorado School
of Medicine: Nurse-visited
mothers are spending
more time talking to their
babies, guiding
them.
WOMAN: Where does the A go?
CHILD: A go right there.
DAVID OLDS: All of that earliest
process that
gets set in motion sets in
motion a positive
cycle of interaction that leads
to significant
reductions in children's
behavioral problems
when they enter school,
significant improvements
in their language development.
CAT WISE: On this day, Hirst
uses simple props
to explain the importance of
talking to Caleb
long before he can talk back.
KIMBERLY HIRST: So, way before
Caleb could
talk, he was learning how to
talk by hearing
you talk. All of these things
were adding
to him having language. When you
read to him
every night, when you told him
what things
were, it bubbled over into
language.
CHILD: Baseball.
KIMBERLY HIRST: A baseball?
CHILD: Yes, baseball.
KIMBERLY HIRST: Yes, baseball.
CHILD: Go -- it.
KIMBERLY HIRST: Go get it? Go
get the baseball?
CHILD: Yes, get ball.
KIMBERLY HIRST: It seems so
simple, but if
he only hears 500 words an hour
verses 3,000
words an hour, it makes a huge
difference
and it's a lasting difference.
CAT WISE: Clinical trials show a
50 percent
reduction in language delays by
age 2 and
a 67 percent reduction in
intellectual problems
by age 6. Such results bolster a
growing area
of brain science that looks at a
baby's early
environment.
Here at the Laboratories of
Cognitive Neuroscience
at Boston's Children's Hospital,
researchers
are studying how a child's early
learning
experiences can shape their
developing brain
and impact early learning.
CHARLES NELSON, Harvard Medical
School: What
many of us are starting to argue
is that,
to foster success as children
make the transition
to school, you need to invest in
what's going
on in those first few years.
CAT WISE: Charles Nelson is a
professor of
pediatrics and neuroscience at
Harvard Medical
School.
CHARLES NELSON: Over those first
few years,
basically, the general
architecture of the
brain forms in a way that sets
it up for the
rest of your life.
CAT WISE: At the Nelson Lab,
researchers use
noninvasive sensors to pick up
communication
between brain cells.
CHARLES NELSON: Millions and
millions and
millions of brain connections
are being built.
And so as we build the
scaffolding for subsequent
learning in those first few
years, that scaffolding
enables learning that occurs
over the lifespan.
CAT WISE: Tell me what we're
seeing here.
CHARLES NELSON: So, we're doing
is, we're
presenting babies with images of
different
facial expressions. We want to
determine at
what age are they able to
discriminate different
emotions? So the baby sees the
different emotions
by different people, and as they
do that,
each time the picture comes up,
we're recording
the brain activity,
CAT WISE: Nelson believes
emotions play a
big role in brain development.
When parents
are depressed, afraid, or
stressed, their
babies' brain development can
suffer.
CHARLES NELSON: If you look
here, she's clearly
happy, and she's clearly angry,
and she's
afraid. Infants who are brought
up in environments
where they do not see happy, mom
is depressed
or there's something else going
on the environment,
respond very differently to
facial emotion.
Development is seriously
impacted. And, more
importantly, if they don't get
them in the
first two or three years,
development probably
is derailed permanently.
CAT WISE: Nelson says
high-poverty homes,
like the kind targeted in Nurse
Family Partnership,
are vulnerable to stress,
depression, and
abuse.
In these homes, he says, early
intervention
can make a big difference in
brain development.
When Sinai Herrera discovered
her junior year
of high school that she was
pregnant, it was
a tough time for her.
KIMBERLY HIRST: She was
struggling with some
depression and trying to figure
out what her
life was going to look like.
CAT WISE: Hirst directed Herrera
into mental
health counseling, and
ultimately back to
school.
WOMAN: With that counseling, I
know I'm a
good mom now. And I know that I
can do everything
that he needs me to do.
CAT WISE: For Stormee Duran, who
went through
the program with her first
child, Sophia (ph),
the issue was an abusive
relationship. Duran
says her nurse gave her the
strength to move
on.
STORMEE DURAN, Nurse Family
Partnership Participant:
She was really there to help me
through that
deep, dark place that I was in.
I have always
had low self-esteem issues, and
so I didn't
want my daughter to grow up like
that.
CAT WISE: The home visits are
not cheap. Each
family-nurse two-year
partnership costs on
average $10,000. But a RAND
Corporation analysis
found the investment actually
saves money.
Every dollar spent today
prevents another
$5 of social welfare spending in
the future.
DAVID OLDS: This is work that is
not just
somebody's good idea, but has
been developed
and tested and retested using
rigorous approaches.
CAT WISE: The nurse-family home
visits have
expanded to 43 states and
recently became
part of the Obama
administration's push for
early learning initiatives.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Cat
Wise.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tonight on
"Frontline": an
investigation with The New York
Times and
the Canadian Broadcasting
Corporation that
raises troubling questions about
the booming
vitamins and supplements
industry.
"Supplements and Safety"
explores how vitamins
are marketed and regulated,
looks at cases
of contamination and serious
health problems,
and examines how it's often hard
to know what's
really in the bottles you buy.
NARRATOR: It's estimated there
are 85,000
dietary supplements for sale in
the United
States today.
MAN: This is an herb that would
be great for
older individuals.
MAN: Essential nutrients like
chromium.
NARRATOR: With so many pitches
and promises,
you might assume that some
government agency
has approved them before
allowing them on
to the market.
STEPHEN OSTROFF, Acting FDA
Commissioner:
The FDA doesn't do any review of
dietary supplements
before they come onto the
market, and I think
that all consumers need to
understand this.
NARRATOR: No testing, no
obligation to provide
any evidence a product is
effective or even
safe. The one thing
manufacturers do have
to show is that they follow good
manufacturing
practices. The FDA conducts
inspections for
that, but it's limited by
resources and by
information.
STEPHEN OSTROFF: We actually
don't know the
total number of manufacturers
that we need
to be able to inspect because
there is no
formal registration system that
is required
of manufacturers that make
dietary supplements.
And so we do inspections of the
ones that
we know about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: "Frontline" airs
tonight on
most PBS stations.
On the "NewsHour" online: Making
good financial
decisions is a challenge for a
lot of people,
but it becomes even harder in
the face of
poverty. How does being poor
actually affect
people's spending? Behavioral
economist Dan
Ariely explains how mental
depletion plays
a role in succumbing to
temptation. That's
on our home page,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Wednesday, we get an update
on the water
crisis in Flint, Michigan.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.